Americans have long been the biggest consumers on
the planet – and American consumption has grown
and grown over time. Americans bought sixty-eight
new items of clothing last year – a huge increase
from the twelve items a year that they used
to buy in the 1980’s. Their spending on that
clothing however, has fallen. In the 1980’s the
average American spent 7% of their annual income
on clothing - while today they just spend just 3%.
So, for less than half the spending shoppers today
are getting almost six times as many items.
According to JP Morgan - since the turn of the
century, real personal consumption growth in
the United States (meaning inflation adjusted
consumption growth) averaged two and a half
percent - but in the second half of 2023,
that rose above 3% even with the higher interest
rates and elevated, but declining, inflation.
Consumer spending accounts for almost 70% of US
GDP and while consumption in Europe has grown
over time too, Europeans tend to spend less
time at work than Americans, do more work at
home and they have lower overall consumption.
For decades, the American consumer has powered
not just the world's biggest economy but the
entire global economy. According to the World Bank
– Americans make up around one third of global
consumer spending but are only 4% of the global
population. We should only be so surprised by
this – Americans are amongst the most productive
workers in the world and thus are amongst the
best paid – the fact that they are both busy and
highly paid makes them naturally big consumers.
Over the last fifty years, the United States has
had just four significant dips in consumer
spending – the biggest having occurred in
2020 when the global pandemic struck. At the
start of the pandemic Americans slashed all
spending and we saw a massive boost in personal
savings as the government pumped a load of money
into the economy. Nobody was traveling. People
couldn’t eat out. They didn’t lose their jobs
and could suddenly work from home. Most Americans
continued to earn money and were simply spending
less. Poorer Americans who lived paycheck
to paycheck suddenly had free time for the
first time in their working lives – and due
to stimulus checks also had savings – which
many had never really had before. People's bank
accounts grew. And once the covid restrictions
started to ease, they went on a spending spree.
While Americans stopped spending on restaurants,
vacations and their daily commutes during the
pandemic, they spent much more on physical
goods – they cancelled gym memberships and bought
things like treadmills. During that period – the
world spent 5% more on physical goods but the
undefeated American consumer spent 10% more.
I asked my viewers in a community post - what
goods Americans buy that the rest of the world
doesn’t – the most popular answer was guns
and ammo – there were also huge trucks – and
of course truck nuts. Whenever I see things
like that, I always imagine how confused the
Chinese factory workers who make them must be.
I imagine they have long conversations in the
evening with their friends and families
about who buys these things and why.
There is no way around it though, Americans do
love spending and not just on necessities like
tattoos, baseball caps, massive water bottles
and aerosol cheese. I spoke to a friend a few
years ago who told me that she rents a storage
space to keep her seasonal decorations. I made
the mistake of assuming she meant Christmas
decorations, only to learn that there are many
more holidays that require inflatable decorations,
and that the Christmas decorations really only
took up about ten percent of her storage locker.
American shoppers love convenience too – not only
are there drive through liquor stores in the
United States – there are drive through bars
too. Some even seem to offer a Sunday morning
discount… In Louisiana – the Strawberry Daquiri
is the breakfast of champions.
According to the Bureau of Labor
Statistics – Americans spend twice as much
on jewelry, watches, books and phones today
as they did twenty-five years ago, new American
homes are almost 25% bigger today than they were
25 years ago, and Americans throw away five times
more consumer waste today than they did in 1980.
A lot of this is driven by goods deflation where
things like clothing furniture and electronics
are cheaper than they have ever been before
– but the goods have often fallen in price
because they have declined in quality too.
Before we dig into that let me tell you about
this week's video sponsor DeleteMe. DeleteMe is
a subscription service that finds and removes
your personal data that's being collected by
data brokers and sold online. Data brokers are
businesses that collect huge amounts of personally
identifiable information on individuals and
package it up to create profiles which can include
things like social security numbers birthdays past
and recent addresses information about your family
and much more this data can be used by identity
thieves or online stalkers who want to harass or
dox you you're legally entitled to protect your
privacy by requesting that data brokers delete
the information that they store on you but
unfortunately there are hundreds of data brokers
and they don't make it easy to get off their lists
it could take forever to do this on your own i
use Delete Me to reach out to the hundreds of data
brokers on my behalf to request the deletion of
my personal data and to deal with any objections
i got a full report back showing where my data was
removed from with a yearly subscription Delete Me
tracks them and make sure that they don't re-add
your data to their lists remove your personal
information from the web using the link in the
description and use code BOYLE for 20% off.
I started out with the statistic that Americans
are spending a much lower percentage of their
income on clothing today than they did in the
1980’s but getting almost six times as many items.
A big difference – as many people my age will know
is that the quality of those items has declined
significantly over time too. I really noticed this
a few years ago when one of my favorite shirts was
getting a bit old – and I went online to see if
I could find the exact same one to buy. Not was I
able to find it, but the price was cheaper than I
remembered. When it arrived in the post though and
I held it up next to the old one – it was made of
a thinner cheaper fabric, the stitching was worse,
and it just didn’t fit the way the old one had. I
went online to return it – and instead of sending
me a shipping label – the seller just gave me
a full refund and told me to throw it out.
I looked online to find old clothing adverts
from the 1980’s so that I could compare the
prices to similar items you can buy today. This
Sears catalogue from 1980 shows a sport coat for
$90 dollars and a topcoat for $130 dollars
– both of these items were on sale at the
time. If we adjust for inflation – the
sport coat costs $350 dollars and the
topcoat over 500 dollars in 2025 dollars.
Going to the Sears website today they have a
$50 dollar blazer and a $140 dollar topcoat – so
quite a bit cheaper than in the past. The 1980
advert – you’ll notice - focused on the quality
of the materials – The wool is handwoven Harris
tweed from Scotland – the advert tells us about
the lining and the leather wrapped buttons too.
You’ll notice that both items come in a number
of different sizes too. The modern item – which
is celebrity endorsed - gives us none of that
information – other than that it can cause cancer
and reproductive harm to California residents
(which is really why I’d never live there) and the
topcoat is one size fits all – which I guess makes
sense – as we are all the same size nowadays…
If your dad bought that tweed blazer 45
years ago – he likely still has it in his
closet today – while if you are planning
on buying either of the new items – I’d
recommend having them shipped straight to
the landfill to cut out the middleman.
Shall we look again at the quality of the
photo they are using to advertise that topcoat?
They clearly spared no cost in putting that
advert together. It’s aimed squarely at the
man who uses Siri or Alexa to buy his clothes.
Alexa – buy me a coat --- no – I don’t live in
California – that shouldn’t
affect me… It’ll be fine…
The way the clothing industry works has changed a
lot over the years. In the 1980’s it used to take
around nine months for an item of clothing to be
designed – a big store like Sears would then order
each item in bulk in a variety of different sizes
– and these items would be available in the store
for maybe six months. If they didn’t sell this was
a problem – and for this reason a lot of thought,
went into finding the right items and
providing quality at every price point.
The term fast fashion first appeared in 1989 in
a New York Times article about a new retailer
at the time called Zara. Zara they explained was
able to go from idea – to having an item in the
store in 15 days because they had built a network
of factories around their headquarters in Spain.
They would manufacture small test batches of
clothes - ship them to the stores – discontinue
the ones that didn’t sell and ramp production in
the items that customers bought. Their approach
didn’t require them to predict trends – they
just had to respond quickly to demand. They
were able to make copies of high-end designer
clothes within weeks – and make them available
cheaply by using low quality fabrics and zips.
Fast fashion brands over time started putting
spandex in everything – as the more the
fabric stretches – the fewer sizes you
have to make – this reduces manufacturing
costs even further – but it also means that
clothes never fit all that well to begin
with and they wear out very quickly.
The same sort of thing that happened with
clothing happened with furniture too. People
were happy to buy disposable furniture as long
as it was cheap and on trend. We started to see
manufactured goods where plastic was used where
metal used to go and glue was used instead of
fasteners. These new products were cheap – which
people like – but they didn’t really last.
Chinese brands like Shein and Temu managed to
undercut Zara – by moving even faster - having
no physical stores – not owning the factories
(instead treating them like uber drivers
hooked up to an app) and exploiting a tax
loophole known as the de minimis exemption.
The de minimis exemption became law in the United
States in 1930, to allow Americans to skip import
duties for small-value shipments. It was put
in place so that people could bring souvenirs
home from their holidays without being taxed. Most
countries around the world have a version of this
rule – but the United States had the highest
exemption rate of $800 dollars per item.
Americans who have ordered goods from
another country online that cost less than
$800 dollars over the last ten years have
benefited from the de minimis exemption.
If they had bought the same item from a local
store, the price would have been a lot higher
as it would have had to include the cost
of manufacturing, shipping, warehousing,
along with the store’s rent, and the wages
of the U.S. employee who works there.
Both Republicans and Democrats have talked about
ending this exemption for quite some time – as it
made it impossible for stores to compete with
brands like Temu and Shein – who could avoid
most of those costs and pay none of the taxes or
fees a larger-volume importer would have to pay.
The de minimis loophole hasn’t yet closed — but
it’s about to. Starting on May 2nd, packages
from China will be hit with a 120 percent tax on
the value of the goods or a $100 flat fee, which
will increase to $200 per package this June.
With the dollar almost ten percent off its
January highs, massive tariffs on imported goods
in place and big American businesses announcing
layoffs – the all-conquering American
consumer might finally slow down.
One of the oldest sayings on Wall Street
is that you should never bet against the
American Consumer – the people who buy Truck Nuts
don’t put their credit cards down that easily.
According to Juliet Schor, a sociologist at
Boston College, the key driver of consumer
spending in America is the role that consumption
plays in establishing an individual’s position
in an unequal society. She says that Americans
consume to keep up with their social group.
According to her research, people who have
reference groups that are wealthier than they are
- tend to spend more to keep up, and people who
have more modest reference groups, even as they
gain in income and wealth, tend to save more.
According to Scientific American 6 to
7 per cent of Americans say they have a
shopping addiction – and research shows
that online shopping is more addictive than in
store shopping as buyers get both the thrill of
buying – and then the excitement of delivery
a few days later. Shopping apps like Temu use
gamification to draw in customers – where shoppers
describe it as feeling like an online casino.
A Penn State paper analyzing shopping behavior
found that compulsive shoppers tend to search
for relatively cheap items when shopping (but
then buy lots of them). Apparently, shoes,
jewelry, and cosmetics rank among the top five
categories of compulsive shoppers’ purchases.
With high import tariffs kicking in and
the end of the de minimis exemption on the
horizon – Americans can expect to see significant
price inflation in the near future – unless all
of these new rules are rolled back – as well may
happen. The press is reporting that many Americans
have already rushed out to stock up on goods
before the prices rise. There was a big spike in
new car purchases last month – as buyers who may
have been holding off on buying a new car – rushed
out to get one for fear that the prices would
be much higher if they waited any longer.
Bloomberg reports that Americans rushed out to
replace their iphones too before prices go up.
Many Americans are reported to be cutting back on
spending on services – like restaurants, hotels
and haircuts as they prepare for an economic
slowdown. New York magazine reports that Chinese
websites like Shein and Temu are raising prices
starting on April 25th and shipping companies
like FedEx and UPS have already added a “surge
fee” for goods entering the U.S. from China.
Some people have argued that if prices go up
due to tariffs that Americans will just start
buying smaller quantities of higher quality goods.
There is no real reason to believe that however.
Typically tariffs drive up the price of imported
goods – but they also allow domestic producers to
increase their prices – which they typically do.
Ramon Van Meer – who runs a business selling
shower heads ran an experiment on his website
to see how many buyers would pay more for an
American manufactured shower head. He gave
shoppers the option to buy a $129 dollar made
in Asia showerhead or the same product – but
made in America for $239 dollars – the price
it would cost. He sold 584 of the made in Asia
showerheads and no Made in America showerheads.
Apparently American Apparel ran a similar
experiment in 2017 with a much more modest
price difference and the majority of customers
still chose the cheaper – imported version.
The Atlantic reports that trends like zero waste
households, capsule wardrobes and minimalism are
generating more and more interest amongst
Americans who are concerned about the waste
they create. Farah Khalique reports that
stores selling secondhand goods are poised
to benefit from the new tariffs as consumers
look to avoid higher prices by searching for
higher quality goods at lower prices.
The moral critique of consumerism is that
buying goods can displace more worthwhile
activities or more important priorities,
but consumption does also create jobs,
stimulate economic growth and can increase
our quality of life and standard of living.
If you found this video interesting – you should
watch my video on the luxury goods bubble
next. Don’t forget to check out our sponsor
DeleteMe using the link in the description.
Talk to you in the next video – bye.